DEPLOYMENT.md, before:

# Deployment Guide

This guide will help you deploy the Medical Dashboard to make it accessible to other users.

## Changes Made

All necessary code changes have been made for deployment:

1. **API URL Configuration** (`src/api/localClient.js`)
   - Now uses environment variable `VITE_API_BASE_URL`
   - Falls back to localhost for local development

2. **Production Server** (`requirements.txt`)
   - Added `gunicorn==21.2.0` for production deployment
   - Commented out local medical articles library path

3. **Security Improvements** (`backend/app.py`)
   - Passwords are now properly hashed using Werkzeug
   - CORS is restricted in production mode
   - Requires `FRONTEND_URL` environment variable for production CORS

4. **Deployment Configuration** (`Procfile`)
   - Created Procfile for Render.com deployment

5. **Weekly Article Fetching** (`backend/app.py`)
   - Added `/api/admin/articles/fetch-weekly` endpoint
   - Supports both admin JWT authentication and cron token for automated scheduling
   - Runs processing in background thread to avoid timeouts

## Deployment Steps

### Backend on Render.com (Free Tier)

1. **Sign up at https://render.com** (free tier available)

2. **Create New Web Service:**
   - Click "New +" → "Web Service"
   - Connect your GitHub repository
   - Select your repository

3. **Configure Service:**
   - **Name**: `medicaldash-backend` (or your choice)
   - **Environment**: `Python 3`
   - **Build Command**: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
   - **Start Command**: (leave blank, uses Procfile automatically)
   - **Root Directory**: (leave blank)

4. **Set Environment Variables:**
   ```
   SECRET_KEY=<generate a strong random string>
   JWT_SECRET_KEY=<generate a different strong random string>
   DATABASE_URL=sqlite:///app.db
   FLASK_ENV=production
   FRONTEND_URL=https://internal-medicine-app.vercel.app
   PORT=10000
   CRON_SECRET_TOKEN=<generate a strong random string for cron jobs>
   PUBMED_EMAIL=<your-email@example.com> (optional, recommended for PubMed API)
   ```
   
   **Generate secrets:**
   ```bash
   # On Mac/Linux:
   python3 -c "import secrets; print(secrets.token_urlsafe(32))"
   # Run this twice: once for SECRET_KEY, once for JWT_SECRET_KEY, once for CRON_SECRET_TOKEN
   ```

5. **Deploy** → Render will automatically deploy your service
   - Note: Free tier services sleep after 15 min inactivity
   - First request after sleep takes ~30 seconds to wake up

### Frontend on Vercel (Free Tier)

1. **Sign up at https://vercel.com** (free tier available)

2. **Import Project:**
   - Click "Add New..." → "Project"
   - Import your GitHub repository

3. **Configure Project:**
   - **Framework Preset**: Vite (should auto-detect)
   - **Build Command**: `npm run build` (auto-detected)
   - **Output Directory**: `dist` (auto-detected)
   - **Root Directory**: `./` (root of repo)

4. **Set Environment Variables:**
   ```
   VITE_API_BASE_URL=https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com/api
   ```
   Using your live backend URL: `https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com`

5. **Deploy** → Vercel will build and deploy your frontend

6. **Update Backend CORS:**
   - Go back to Render dashboard
   - Update `FRONTEND_URL` environment variable with your Vercel URL
   - Redeploy if needed

## Important Notes

### Existing Users
⚠️ **Warning**: After deploying with password hashing, existing users with plain text passwords will need to re-register or have their passwords reset manually in the database.

### Medical Articles Library
The medical articles library path in `requirements.txt` is commented out. If you need it in production:
- Package it as a proper Python package
- Or adjust the path for your deployment environment
- Or install it separately on Render

### Database Persistence ⚠️ IMPORTANT

**SQLite on Render Free Tier:**
- ⚠️ **Data Loss Warning**: Render's free tier uses **ephemeral storage**, meaning SQLite databases (`app.db` and `medical_articles.db`) are **lost on every redeploy or restart**
- This affects:
  - User accounts and passwords
  - "Marked as read" / "Want to read" statuses
  - "Hide from dashboard" flags
  - All user-generated data

**Solution: Use PostgreSQL (Recommended)**

1. **Create PostgreSQL Database on Render:**
   - In Render dashboard: "New +" → "PostgreSQL"
   - Name it (e.g., `medicaldash-db`)
   - Copy the **Internal Database URL** (starts with `postgresql://`)

2. **Update Environment Variables:**
   - In your backend service settings, update `DATABASE_URL`:
     ```
     DATABASE_URL=postgresql://user:password@hostname:5432/dbname
     ```
   - Use the **Internal Database URL** from Render (not external)

3. **Update Code for PostgreSQL:**
   - Install PostgreSQL adapter: Add `psycopg2-binary==2.9.9` to `requirements.txt`
   - The code should work with PostgreSQL without changes (SQLAlchemy handles it)

4. **For Medical Articles Database:**
   - The `medical_articles.db` file also needs persistence
   - Options:
     a. **Use PostgreSQL for medical articles too** (recommended - requires schema migration)
     b. **Use Render Disk** (paid feature) to persist SQLite file - see below
     c. **Use external storage** (S3, etc.) for the SQLite file

**Option B: Use Render Persistent Disk (Paid Tier) - Keep SQLite**

If you upgrade to Render's paid tier, you can use persistent disks to keep SQLite databases:

1. **Upgrade to Paid Tier:**
   - Render Starter plan ($7/month) or higher
   - Includes persistent disk storage

2. **Attach Persistent Disk:**
   - In Render dashboard → Your service → "Disks" tab
   - Click "Attach Disk"
   - **Mount Path**: `/data` (or your preferred path)
   - **Size**: Start with 10GB (can increase later, not decrease)
   - Save

3. **Configure Database Paths:**
   - Set environment variable in your service:
     ```
     PERSISTENT_DATA_PATH=/data
     ```
   - Update `DATABASE_URL` to use persistent path:
     ```
     DATABASE_URL=sqlite:////data/app.db
     ```
   - The code will automatically use this path (see below)

4. **Update Code (if needed):**
   - The current code uses relative paths
   - We'll update it to check for `PERSISTENT_DATA_PATH` environment variable
   - If set, databases will be stored on the persistent disk

5. **Important Limitations:**
   - ⚠️ **Single Instance Only**: Services with disks can't scale horizontally
   - ⚠️ **No Zero-Downtime Deploys**: Must stop service before deploying
   - ✅ **Data Persists**: All data survives redeploys and restarts

**Alternative: Keep SQLite but Accept Data Loss (Free Tier)**
- If you're okay with data being reset on redeploy
- Good for development/testing only
- Not recommended for production with real users

### Free Tier Limitations

**Render:**
- Services sleep after 15 min of inactivity
- First request after sleep: ~30 second wake-up time
- 750 hours/month (enough for always-on if not sleeping)

**Vercel:**
- Unlimited static hosting
- Generous bandwidth limits
- Perfect for side projects

## Weekly Article Fetching

The backend includes an endpoint to automatically fetch and classify articles from the last 7 days. Since Render's free tier doesn't support cron jobs, you'll need to use an external cron service.

### Setting Up Automated Weekly Fetching

1. **Get your backend URL and cron token:**
   - Your backend URL: `https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com` (or your Render URL)
   - Your cron token: The `CRON_SECRET_TOKEN` you set in Render environment variables

2. **Set up an external cron service** (recommended: **cron-job.org** - free):
   - Go to https://cron-job.org (free account available)
   - Create a new cron job
   - **URL**: `https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com/api/admin/articles/fetch-weekly`
   - **Method**: POST
   - **Schedule**: Weekly (e.g., every Monday at 2:00 AM)
   - **Headers**: Add custom header `X-Cron-Token: <your-cron-secret-token>`
   - Or use query parameter: `?token=<your-cron-secret-token>`
   - Save the cron job

3. **Alternative: Use curl from your own server:**
   ```bash
   # Run this weekly (e.g., via cron on your own server):
   curl -X POST https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com/api/admin/articles/fetch-weekly \
     -H "X-Cron-Token: <your-cron-secret-token>"
   ```

4. **Manual triggering (admin only):**
   - Log in as admin in your app
   - Make a POST request to `/api/admin/articles/fetch-weekly` with your JWT token
   - Or use curl:
   ```bash
   curl -X POST https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com/api/admin/articles/fetch-weekly \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer <your-jwt-token>"
   ```

### How It Works

- The endpoint accepts either:
  - Admin JWT token (for manual triggering)
  - `CRON_SECRET_TOKEN` (for automated cron services)
- Processing runs in a background thread to avoid timeouts
- The endpoint returns immediately with status 202 (Accepted)
- Processing typically takes 5-30 minutes depending on the number of articles
- Check Render logs to see processing status

### Important Notes

⚠️ **Render Free Tier**: Services sleep after 15 minutes of inactivity. The first request to wake up the service takes ~30 seconds. For weekly fetching:
- This delay is acceptable since it runs weekly
- The cron service will wake up the Render service automatically
- Consider upgrading to Render paid tier if you need faster wake-up times

## Testing

1. Test your deployed backend:
   ```bash
   curl https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com/api/health
   ```

2. Visit your Vercel URL and test:
   - User registration
   - Login
   - All functionality

## Troubleshooting

### Backend won't start on Render
- Check the build logs in Render dashboard
- Ensure `Procfile` is in the root directory
- Verify all dependencies in `requirements.txt` are installable

### Frontend can't connect to backend
- Verify `VITE_API_BASE_URL` is set correctly in Vercel
- Check backend CORS configuration
- Ensure backend `FRONTEND_URL` matches your Vercel URL

### CORS errors
- Make sure `FRONTEND_URL` in backend matches your Vercel domain exactly (including https://)
- Check browser console for specific CORS error messages

## Cost

**Total: $0/month** (using free tiers)

- Render free tier: 750 hours/month
- Vercel free tier: Unlimited static hosting
- SQLite: No database service needed

## Next Steps (Optional)

1. **Custom Domain:**
   - Add custom domain in Vercel (free)
   - Add custom domain in Render (free)
   - Update environment variables

2. **Database Migration:**
   - Set up PostgreSQL on Render (free tier available)
   - Update `DATABASE_URL`
   - Migrate data from SQLite

3. **Monitoring:**
   - Set up basic monitoring (optional)
   - Configure error alerts (if desired)

Commit message:

Fix database persistence issues for Render persistent disk
- Update database paths to use absolute paths when PERSISTENT_DATA_PATH is set
- Ensure directories are created automatically for persistent storage
- Remove medical_articles.db from git tracking (should not be in repo)
- Update .gitignore to prevent database files from being committed
- Add comprehensive deployment documentation for persistent disk setup
- Add DATABASE_MIGRATION.md guide explaining data migration scenarios

This fixes the issue where user actions (key study flags, hidden flags,
library additions) were being lost after redeploys. Now all data persists
permanently when PERSISTENT_DATA_PATH environment variable is set on Render.

DEPLOYMENT.md, after:

# Deployment Guide

This guide will help you deploy the Medical Dashboard to make it accessible to other users.

## Changes Made

All necessary code changes have been made for deployment:

1. **API URL Configuration** (`src/api/localClient.js`)
   - Now uses environment variable `VITE_API_BASE_URL`
   - Falls back to localhost for local development

2. **Production Server** (`requirements.txt`)
   - Added `gunicorn==21.2.0` for production deployment
   - Commented out local medical articles library path

3. **Security Improvements** (`backend/app.py`)
   - Passwords are now properly hashed using Werkzeug
   - CORS is restricted in production mode
   - Requires `FRONTEND_URL` environment variable for production CORS

4. **Deployment Configuration** (`Procfile`)
   - Created Procfile for Render.com deployment

5. **Weekly Article Fetching** (`backend/app.py`)
   - Added `/api/admin/articles/fetch-weekly` endpoint
   - Supports both admin JWT authentication and cron token for automated scheduling
   - Runs processing in background thread to avoid timeouts

## Deployment Steps

### Backend on Render.com (Free Tier)

1. **Sign up at https://render.com** (free tier available)

2. **Create New Web Service:**
   - Click "New +" → "Web Service"
   - Connect your GitHub repository
   - Select your repository

3. **Configure Service:**
   - **Name**: `medicaldash-backend` (or your choice)
   - **Environment**: `Python 3`
   - **Build Command**: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
   - **Start Command**: (leave blank, uses Procfile automatically)
   - **Root Directory**: (leave blank)

4. **Set Environment Variables:**
   ```
   SECRET_KEY=<generate a strong random string>
   JWT_SECRET_KEY=<generate a different strong random string>
   DATABASE_URL=sqlite:///app.db
   FLASK_ENV=production
   FRONTEND_URL=https://internal-medicine-app.vercel.app
   PORT=10000
   CRON_SECRET_TOKEN=<generate a strong random string for cron jobs>
   PUBMED_EMAIL=<your-email@example.com> (optional, recommended for PubMed API)
   ```
   
   **Generate secrets:**
   ```bash
   # On Mac/Linux:
   python3 -c "import secrets; print(secrets.token_urlsafe(32))"
   # Run this twice: once for SECRET_KEY, once for JWT_SECRET_KEY, once for CRON_SECRET_TOKEN
   ```

5. **Deploy** → Render will automatically deploy your service
   - Note: Free tier services sleep after 15 min inactivity
   - First request after sleep takes ~30 seconds to wake up

### Frontend on Vercel (Free Tier)

1. **Sign up at https://vercel.com** (free tier available)

2. **Import Project:**
   - Click "Add New..." → "Project"
   - Import your GitHub repository

3. **Configure Project:**
   - **Framework Preset**: Vite (should auto-detect)
   - **Build Command**: `npm run build` (auto-detected)
   - **Output Directory**: `dist` (auto-detected)
   - **Root Directory**: `./` (root of repo)

4. **Set Environment Variables:**
   ```
   VITE_API_BASE_URL=https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com/api
   ```
   Using your live backend URL: `https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com`

5. **Deploy** → Vercel will build and deploy your frontend

6. **Update Backend CORS:**
   - Go back to Render dashboard
   - Update `FRONTEND_URL` environment variable with your Vercel URL
   - Redeploy if needed

## Important Notes

### Existing Users
⚠️ **Warning**: After deploying with password hashing, existing users with plain text passwords will need to re-register or have their passwords reset manually in the database.

### Medical Articles Library
The medical articles library path in `requirements.txt` is commented out. If you need it in production:
- Package it as a proper Python package
- Or adjust the path for your deployment environment
- Or install it separately on Render

### Database Persistence ⚠️ IMPORTANT

**SQLite on Render Free Tier:**
- ⚠️ **Data Loss Warning**: Render's free tier uses **ephemeral storage**, meaning SQLite databases (`app.db` and `medical_articles.db`) are **lost on every redeploy or restart**
- This affects:
  - User accounts and passwords
  - "Marked as read" / "Want to read" statuses
  - "Hide from dashboard" flags
  - All user-generated data

**Solution: Use PostgreSQL (Recommended)**

1. **Create PostgreSQL Database on Render:**
   - In Render dashboard: "New +" → "PostgreSQL"
   - Name it (e.g., `medicaldash-db`)
   - Copy the **Internal Database URL** (starts with `postgresql://`)

2. **Update Environment Variables:**
   - In your backend service settings, update `DATABASE_URL`:
     ```
     DATABASE_URL=postgresql://user:password@hostname:5432/dbname
     ```
   - Use the **Internal Database URL** from Render (not external)

3. **Update Code for PostgreSQL:**
   - Install PostgreSQL adapter: Add `psycopg2-binary==2.9.9` to `requirements.txt`
   - The code should work with PostgreSQL without changes (SQLAlchemy handles it)

4. **For Medical Articles Database:**
   - The `medical_articles.db` file also needs persistence
   - Options:
     a. **Use PostgreSQL for medical articles too** (recommended - requires schema migration)
     b. **Use Render Disk** (paid feature) to persist SQLite file - see below
     c. **Use external storage** (S3, etc.) for the SQLite file

**Option B: Use Render Persistent Disk (Paid Tier) - Keep SQLite** ✅ RECOMMENDED

If you upgrade to Render's paid tier, you can use persistent disks to keep SQLite databases. **The code is now configured to automatically use persistent storage when available.**

1. **Upgrade to Paid Tier:**
   - Render Starter plan ($7/month) or higher
   - Includes persistent disk storage

2. **Attach Persistent Disk:**
   - In Render dashboard → Your service → "Disks" tab
   - Click "Attach Disk"
   - **Mount Path**: `/data` (or your preferred path)
   - **Size**: Start with 10GB (can increase later, not decrease)
   - Save

3. **Configure Environment Variable:**
   - In your Render service settings → Environment tab
   - Add environment variable:
     ```
     PERSISTENT_DATA_PATH=/data
     ```
   - **That's it!** The code will automatically:
     - Store `app.db` (user accounts, key study flags, user library) at `/data/app.db`
     - Store `medical_articles.db` (article classifications, hidden flags) at `/data/medical_articles.db`
   - You do NOT need to set `DATABASE_URL` - the code handles it automatically

4. **⚠️ First Deploy Note:**
   - **If you're migrating from free tier:** The first deploy will create **new empty databases** on the persistent disk
   - Your old ephemeral databases will be ignored (they were being lost on redeploys anyway)
   - This is a **fresh start** - but all future data will persist permanently
   - **If you already have a persistent disk:** Existing databases will continue to work (no data loss)
   - See `DATABASE_MIGRATION.md` for detailed migration scenarios

5. **Verify Setup:**
   - After deploying, check Render logs to confirm databases are being created
   - Test by marking a study as key or adding to library, then redeploy
   - Data should persist after redeploy

5. **Important Limitations:**
   - ⚠️ **Single Instance Only**: Services with disks can't scale horizontally
   - ⚠️ **No Zero-Downtime Deploys**: Must stop service before deploying
   - ✅ **Data Persists**: All data survives redeploys and restarts
   - ✅ **All User Actions Persist**: Key study flags, hidden flags, and user library additions are now permanent

**Alternative: Keep SQLite but Accept Data Loss (Free Tier)**
- If you're okay with data being reset on redeploy
- Good for development/testing only
- Not recommended for production with real users

### Free Tier Limitations

**Render:**
- Services sleep after 15 min of inactivity
- First request after sleep: ~30 second wake-up time
- 750 hours/month (enough for always-on if not sleeping)

**Vercel:**
- Unlimited static hosting
- Generous bandwidth limits
- Perfect for side projects

## Weekly Article Fetching

The backend includes an endpoint to automatically fetch and classify articles from the last 7 days. Since Render's free tier doesn't support cron jobs, you'll need to use an external cron service.

### Setting Up Automated Weekly Fetching

1. **Get your backend URL and cron token:**
   - Your backend URL: `https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com` (or your Render URL)
   - Your cron token: The `CRON_SECRET_TOKEN` you set in Render environment variables

2. **Set up an external cron service** (recommended: **cron-job.org** - free):
   - Go to https://cron-job.org (free account available)
   - Create a new cron job
   - **URL**: `https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com/api/admin/articles/fetch-weekly`
   - **Method**: POST
   - **Schedule**: Weekly (e.g., every Monday at 2:00 AM)
   - **Headers**: Add custom header `X-Cron-Token: <your-cron-secret-token>`
   - Or use query parameter: `?token=<your-cron-secret-token>`
   - Save the cron job

3. **Alternative: Use curl from your own server:**
   ```bash
   # Run this weekly (e.g., via cron on your own server):
   curl -X POST https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com/api/admin/articles/fetch-weekly \
     -H "X-Cron-Token: <your-cron-secret-token>"
   ```

4. **Manual triggering (admin only):**
   - Log in as admin in your app
   - Make a POST request to `/api/admin/articles/fetch-weekly` with your JWT token
   - Or use curl:
   ```bash
   curl -X POST https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com/api/admin/articles/fetch-weekly \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer <your-jwt-token>"
   ```

### How It Works

- The endpoint accepts either:
  - Admin JWT token (for manual triggering)
  - `CRON_SECRET_TOKEN` (for automated cron services)
- Processing runs in a background thread to avoid timeouts
- The endpoint returns immediately with status 202 (Accepted)
- Processing typically takes 5-30 minutes depending on the number of articles
- Check Render logs to see processing status

### Important Notes

⚠️ **Render Free Tier**: Services sleep after 15 minutes of inactivity. The first request to wake up the service takes ~30 seconds. For weekly fetching:
- This delay is acceptable since it runs weekly
- The cron service will wake up the Render service automatically
- Consider upgrading to Render paid tier if you need faster wake-up times

## Testing

1. Test your deployed backend:
   ```bash
   curl https://medicaldash-backend.onrender.com/api/health
   ```

2. Visit your Vercel URL and test:
   - User registration
   - Login
   - All functionality

## Troubleshooting

### Backend won't start on Render
- Check the build logs in Render dashboard
- Ensure `Procfile` is in the root directory
- Verify all dependencies in `requirements.txt` are installable

### Frontend can't connect to backend
- Verify `VITE_API_BASE_URL` is set correctly in Vercel
- Check backend CORS configuration
- Ensure backend `FRONTEND_URL` matches your Vercel URL

### CORS errors
- Make sure `FRONTEND_URL` in backend matches your Vercel domain exactly (including https://)
- Check browser console for specific CORS error messages

## Cost

**Total: $0/month** (using free tiers)

- Render free tier: 750 hours/month
- Vercel free tier: Unlimited static hosting
- SQLite: No database service needed

## Next Steps (Optional)

1. **Custom Domain:**
   - Add custom domain in Vercel (free)
   - Add custom domain in Render (free)
   - Update environment variables

2. **Database Migration:**
   - Set up PostgreSQL on Render (free tier available)
   - Update `DATABASE_URL`
   - Migrate data from SQLite

3. **Monitoring:**
   - Set up basic monitoring (optional)
   - Configure error alerts (if desired)
